Pure functions and overview.
So what is a pure function also known as a pure method.
And why is it relevant here to the unit testing process?
A pure function can be thought of one that has less effect and dependencies on other unrelated systems.
By unrelated, I mean not directly related to the code in the body of the function itself.
A way we can look at it here as I'm reading the screen, that return values are identical for identical
arguments, meaning if you pass in a value as one of the arguments, you're going to always get the
same result, and secondly, that it has no side effects.
Side effects are indirect outputs or other systems that get affected during the execution of a given
method.
So the more pure a function is, the more isolated and independently it runs.
So in the included sample code for the sample project, you'll see something similar to this in the
C-sharp code base.
Here I've put a couple of colors to it just so we can look at it.
So imagine we've got a custom class here that is called My System, and one method inside of it is called
Convert value.
Notice that there's two arguments that I pass in and those two values, and only those two values are
the direct inputs that affect the operation.
There's no third public static private static unrelated system that we see in the blue there.
It's very simple.
Now you could have many more lines of code here.
It's not just that this is brief, that makes it pure.
It's that we see that the result depends on the arguments and only on those arguments.
So it's highly pure when we talk about the outputs or the side effects here we can see that no other
values are set here.
If we set any temporary values that's okay in a pure function.
But if we were to be setting values within the blue here on unrelated systems or on static variables
that have a lifespan beyond this method, those would be things that would make it less pure.
Now we're going to be looking at some more slides here, getting some theory as well as jumping into
the code.
So as I'm introducing and reinforcing these concepts, we'll all learn a bit more of the appreciation
for what it means to be a pure function.
So here we see an even more in-depth explanation.
I'll read it aloud.
A pure function is generally easier to debug, maintain, and unit test because of the following factors
one.
It doesn't have any side effects.
That means the behavior is predictable and consistent solely based on that input.
Just like we saw in the example, it is deterministic.
That means given certain input, we always produce the same output.
It means there's no other values that are unrelated.
There's no randomness to it.
If we if we pass in the values three and ten, we would always get the value 30.
In the previous example, a pure function also runs in isolation, so there's no need to set up and
manage external dependencies.
This could be lots of different examples, but a few here are databases.
File system network resources, other classes that are created used by the system as well.
And another reason that it's so easy to debug and maintain in unit testing is because there's just simpler
unit tests.
You are able to provide the inputs and assert the specific outputs.
There's less boilerplate of creation of things around the test itself.
And finally it's modular and reusable.
So code that is a pure function and based on pure functions tends to be more self-contained, portable,
and making it easier to reuse the same functionality in different contexts.
Now as we go through and we talk about pure functions, much like the theme of the course as a whole,
I would say when your code is more easily testable, that is good for the testing process, but more
largely it hints that the code is just better designed.
So even if we weren't to test our code, if our code has no side effect, is more deterministic, is
more isolated and modular and reusable, that is beneficial to the production code itself.
So we see a ebb and flow between the benefits of something being unit testable, as well as the benefits
of it being production code.
So if that's what a pure function is, then what is a non pure function?
Well, it's simply a function that is not so pure.
Also this isn't 100% pure, 100% not pure.
When we're talking about a given function we can assess its level of purity.
That might be somewhere in the middle.
Some of the key criteria of a non pure function is that it has.
Indirect inputs, meaning there's some sort of shared state.
Maybe we pass a value in and it operates on that value, plus using some other dependencies that's impure
and also having indirect outputs.
Remember our simple example.
We'll look at another one soon.
It would just multiply two numbers and return it.
It wasn't setting any unrelated system values that would sit around stagnant as some sort of shared
state.
But here, in the case of a non pure function, it may have one or both of the idea of indirect inputs
indirect outputs.
So here's a very simple example.
This is also in the sample project.
And this is an example of a system that is non pure.
So it's a little bit different.
We're kind of doing the same multiplication operation here.
But notice here the convert value method.
It doesn't take all the arguments that it needs.
It takes one value and it multiplies it by some existing system value.
So this is an example of indirect input.
The multiplier exists before the convert value method is called.
So that's the indirect input part of an impure function.
Now the other part we talked about is is having some indirect output here.
We don't see an example of that.
There's no state that has changed that persists.
We just return a simple value.
And returning a value does not count against it.
So we have indirect input but no indirect output.
But still having one of those here makes it impure.
So what do we do with these non pure functions.
We've hinted that pure functions are easier to test and have a lot of benefits in their production code
usage as well.
Well, if we don't have a pure function what can we do about that.
Well some of the things we could do, we could certainly leave it alone, leaving it as impure.
And often we're going to do that.
But sometimes when we're taking a look at doing the unit testing of something, we might be encouraged
to do a bit of refactoring to help that system become a bit more pure.
Maybe we can't get it 100% there, but it's this is again talking about the art.
It's up to you to decide how pure and how impure you want your code to sit.
Now, some developers might theoretically approach it where they want everything to be pure all the
time.
That's one approach.
Another one is just to create code as you used to create it.
And if that happened to be impure, you just leave it impure.
What I want to invite you to do is massage the ideas a little bit, and be comfortable to play with
somewhere in the middle where you can take something non pure and make it a bit more pure.
Recognizing the benefits to your unit testing as well as the benefits to your production code.
So let's see what we can do here.
We could eliminate some of the side effects.
We could eliminate the shared state similar to side effects.
We could eliminate dependencies that are used.
And we can invite ourselves to have one assertion per test.
Now that is going to help us understand that if a test asserts just one thing, then our code has to
be pretty simple in order to meet that assertion.
So we'll play with that a little bit when we look at the code.
So how can we go about this?
Well, we can do some of the refactoring of the production code, doing the steps that we saw in the
previous slide.
And another one is I want to introduce a new concept of test doubles in the next section.
Thanks.